Israel says it gives adequate notice
before bombing an area but the number of
Civilian casualties is still mounting
Palestinians have been ordered to
evacuate countless times since October
the 7th first they were told to leave
their homes in the north and go south of
Wadi Gaza many moved to Khan yunes in
the south then the Israeli Army issued
evacuation orders for parts of Khan
Yunis as it intensified strikes and
ground operations there but it only
gives people a few hours notice Ro have
been destroyed and bombing it doesn't
stop meaning moving anywhere is
extremely difficult and dangerous the UN
says 1.9 million Palestinians more than
80% of the population have been forced
from their homes either by Israeli
attacks or Israeli evacuation
orders meanwhile some Israelis have
expressed a desire to return to
settlements in Gaza which were abandoned
nearly two decades
ago in the end we will have no choice
probably but to rule there in Gaza we
obviously must rule militarily we will
have to rule and it could come to that
returning to gush kti it's simply
reality will oblige Israel to Ru Gaza
there might be such a thing in history
in reality I'm a Believer yes God might
force it to happen that
way they are not talking about returning
to the former settlements in Gaza yet
but this is something that can happen
because there might be no choice the IDF
will have to rule there in Gaza in any
case you can't ru if you don't have
settlements
there I believe we shall return to Gaza
the question is when I have no idea I
believe we shall return because the Gaza
Strip belongs to us it is part of the
boundaries of the promised land so we
must return
there well Toby Cadman is an
international human rights lawyer he
joins us now from the hag good to have
you with us so I want to start by
referencing a statement by the United
Nations on October the 1 quoting or
referring to a un expert as quote
condemning the evacuation order as a
crime against humanity and a blatant
violation of international humanitarian
law that was back on October the
13th what is the legality now of these
repeated evacuation
orders well thank you I think we've said
since the very beginning that these uh
evacuation orders um forcing gazans to
to leave their homes with very little
notice before their their homes are
effectively destroyed and and larger
areas of Gaza being flattened um we
we've consistently stated that there's
no there's no proper legal basis for
doing that and the fact that the the is
Israeli authorities repeatedly say that
they give sufficient notice to civilians
so that they can leave is there's still
no
justification um for for devastating
civilian areas um and it's it's all the
more worrying when we see certainly
civilians being mov one from one area to
another and then that other area then
subsequently being attacked um and I
think that the the the the evidence is
obviously mounting up um for future
prosecutions of of war crimes because
it's being documented in real time we're
seing statements we're seen seeing the
conduct and the lack of justification
the lack of proportional
and the lack of distinction between
military and civilian
targets and coupled with that when you
combine the two elements which you
mentioned their evacuation orders
telling people to go to the South but
then the south southern areas themselves
also falling victim to Israeli strikes
that makes it even more questionable to
put it
politely well yes I think I think the
the term that I've used before on on on
this channel is it's it's perfidious um
so when you're
effectively giving civilians uh safe
passage and to an area which is
protected and then that era is is is
then attacked um it's is reminiscent of
July 1995 in sbera when um safe safe
areas enclaves were were established and
then we we saw what the outcome of that
was more than 8,000 men and boys killed
so it is it is deeply disturbing when we
see this time and time
again in adding another layer to that of
course we should put it in the context
of this is an area that under
international law according to
statements many statements by various un
agencies and officials this is an
occupied territory it's been under
occupation since
1967 it is under siege for 16 years what
is the legality then of then going and
establishing settlements which is the
Talk Amongst some right now there are
even Israeli companies talking about
building what they call developments in
Gaza well certainly we we can we can go
back to to the way that the the existing
settlements and expansion of settlements
has been viewed um certainly the former
prosecutor of the international criminal
court um fatti Ben suda had had stated
that U the the establishment of
settlements fell within the jurisdiction
um of the international criminal court
and of course um moving a population
into an area under occupation is a war
crime um and Israel is governed
specifically by the Fourth Geneva
Convention which governs uh occupation
and you know we we we we've spoken about
this repeatedly how the occupation is
unlawful
moving a population
in an occupied area by the occup is
unlawful moving those who are under
occupation out or into different areas
whether that is uh internally or
externally is also prohibited and what
we see now is statements coming out from
from Netanyahu and and his government
that they are now looking to move
Palestinians completely out of Gaza um
to occupy it and to to establish
settlements it is all unlawful and again
um I I hate to sound like a broken
record but if this was happening
anywhere else in the world we wouldn't
be having this discussion having to
establish that that this is unlawful of
course it's unlawful we all know it's
unlawful but it's it's about time that
we actually took some concrete steps to
prevent it getting worse and on that
point particularly your point of if this
was happening anywhere else in the world
as I'm sure you're aware there's been
criticism of the ICC prosecutor and the
ICC itself because we've seen in other
scenarios Ukraine being an example where
there were allegations of war crimes
even in cases where they were not able
to send their investigators to the
ground that war crimes investigations
had begun and even arrest warrants
issued for very powerful
people why would you is it fair to say
that the ICC has been too slow to move
in this case
I think it's uh fair to criticize it for
for being uh slow to wake up I think
what Karim Khan the prosecutor is doing
now is trying to move things forward but
you know we're we're at the stage even
before October of this year there has
been uh plenty of time um for the IC to
to take to take action um Toby does that
undermine and politicize increase the
perception of politicization of justice
and the ICC
well absolutely and look I I think we we
have to accept that there is no conflict
more politically charged than the Israel
Palestine conflict it is it is the most
politicized conflict that that we we've
experienced and we likely to experience
um and and so you have to factor that
into into the equation but the ICC is an
institution that is supposed to be
acting independent of politics and I
think we have to take the position now
that there is nothing preventing the IC
from moving forward there's nothing
preventing the prosecutor from properly
investigating this and as we say we're
seeing the evidence play out on our
screens
uh in real time that there there is a
sufficient basis as there was in Ukraine
to issue the arrest warrant for Vladimir
Putin there is a sufficient basis for
bringing arrest warrants for both those
that committed the atrocities on the 7th
of October and those Israeli officials
who have have continued with the the
language that they use the attacks
flattening Gaza of establishing
settlements that the time has come for
there to be concrete action all right
thank you so much Toby
Cadman thank you